About the project
Major archaeological excavations took place at Skálholt over six seasons, between 2002 and 2007. 
The work was part of a national, five-year programme of millennial funding for cultural projects to celebrate a thousand years of Christianity in Iceland (Kristnihátíðarsjóður). The investigations were largely confined to an open area encompassing the core of the settlement and which can be explored using the interactive map. The excavations fully uncovered the remains of structural activity from c. 1720-1950, but only partially from c. 1650-1720 and nothing earlier. Besides the main area, several smaller interventions were made on the periphery of the settlement, including a long trench across a mound to the west, and 9 test pits along an extensive midden zone just south of/outside the main settlement boundary wall.
About the material
The use of archival material – maps, photographs and other documents, were invaluable in understanding the site, both spatially and chronologically. 
Besides the obvious benefit of being able to identify room functions, appearance and even internal furnishings and layout, they also helped in the interpretation of the less well-preserved buildings. Many structures had been damaged, almost beyond visibility and it was only through such archival sources that they were interpreted as buildings at all. The most important written sources were the regular inventories (úttektar) taken at the accession of a new Bishop, transcripts of which can be found under Project Data on this website. The originals of these documents are housed at the National Archives (Þjóðskjalasafn Íslands) under the Episcopal Archives (Biskups skalasafn, abbrev. Bps). Other key sources include various maps from the mid 18th century and later
The team
The team behind the project
The excavations were directed by Gavin Lucas and Mjöll Snæsdóttir with a team of core staff: Andrew Hall, Ágústa Edwald, Candy Hatherley, Birna Lárusdóttir, Elín Hreiðarsdóttir, Lilja Björk Pálsdóttir, Óskar Gísli Sveinbjarnarson, Sigríður Þorgeirsdóttir, Sólveig Guðmunsdóttir Beck and Uggi Ævarsson. Besides this core, staff, we had a number of people working for one or occasionally two seasons: Oddgeir Hansson, Orri Vésteinsson, Richard Turnbull, Marcus Abbott, Andrew Clarke, Guðrún Alda Gísladóttir, Jane Hamill, Cassian Hall, Mike Church, Dmitri Tarat, Auður Hálldórsdóttir, Natascha Mehler, Oscar Aldred, Óskar Leifur Arnarson and  Hrönn Konraðsdóttir. This website was created by Hallur Kristinn Hallson, Jaan Jaerving and Gudrun Sara Ornolfsdottir 
